
## Increasing of heat-wave hazards in Southeastern capitals of the European Union Member States

<span lang="it-IT">**Marco Morabito** </span><span
lang="it-IT">**[1,2]**</span><span lang="it-IT">**, Alfonso Crisci**
</span><span lang="it-IT">**[1]**</span><span lang="it-IT">**,
Alessandro Messeri** </span><span lang="it-IT">**[2]**</span><span
lang="it-IT">**, Gianni Messeri** </span><span
lang="it-IT">**[1,3]**</span><span lang="it-IT">**, Giulio Betti**
</span><span lang="it-IT">**[3]**</span><span lang="it-IT">**, Simone
Orlandini** </span><span lang="it-IT">**[2,4]**</span><span
lang="it-IT">**, Antonio Raschi** </span><span
lang="it-IT">**[1]**</span><span lang="it-IT">**, Giampiero Maracchi**
</span><span lang="it-IT">**[5]**</span>


<span lang="fr-CH">1</span><span lang="fr-CH"> </span><span
lang="fr-CH">Institute of Biometeorology, National Research Council,
Florence, Italy; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">m.morabito@ibimet.cnr.it</span>](mailto:m.morabito@ibimet.cnr.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH">; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">a.crisci@ibimet.cnr.it</span>](mailto:a.crisci@ibimet.cnr.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH">; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">g.messeri@ibmet.cnr.it</span>](mailto:g.messeri@ibmet.cnr.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH">; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">a.raschi@ibimet.cnr.it</span>](mailto:a.raschi@ibimet.cnr.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH"> </span>

<span lang="fr-CH">2 </span><span lang="fr-CH">Centre of
Bioclimatology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; </span><span
lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">marco.morabito@unifi.it</span>](mailto:marco.morabito@unifi.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH">; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">alessandro.messeri@unifi.it</span>](mailto:alessandro.messeri@unifi.it)</span><span
lang="fr-CH">; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="fr-CH">simone.orlandini@unifi.it</span>](mailto:simone.orlandini@unifi.it)</span>

<span lang="fr-CH">3 </span><span lang="fr-CH"> </span>Consorzio
LaMMA –Laboratory of environmental modelling and monitoring for a
sustainable development, Sesto Fiorentino (Firenze), Italy; <span
lang="zxx"><messeri@lamma.rete.toscana.it></span>; <span
lang="zxx"><betti@lamma.rete.toscana.it></span>

<span lang="fr-CH">4 </span> Department of Agrifood Production and
Environmental Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; <span
lang="zxx"><simone.orlandini@unifi.it></span>

<span lang="fr-CH">5 </span><span lang="it-IT"> Accademia dei
Georgofili, Florence, Italy; </span><span lang="zxx">[<span
lang="it-IT">giampiero.maracchi@georgofili.it</span>](mailto:giampiero.maracchi@georgofili.it)</span><span
lang="it-IT"> </span>

Correspondence: <span lang="zxx"><m.morabito@ibimet.cnr.it></span>; Tel.: +39-055-5226041


**Abstract:** Heat-wave (HW) are one of the “natural” hazards with the
greatest impact worldwide in terms of mortality and economic losses, and
its effect may be exacerbated in large urban areas. For these reasons,
more detailed analyses on urban HW trends represent a priority that can
not be neglected. In this study, HW trends were investigated during the
warmest period of the year (May-September) by using a slightly improved
version of the EuroHEAT HW definition applied on long meteorological
time-series (36-year period, 1980-2015) collected by weather stations
located in the capitals of the 28 European Union member countries.
Comparisons between two 18-year sub-periods (1980-1997 vs. 1998-2015)
were carried out and a new city-specific HW hazard index (HWHI),
accounting for the main HW characteristics, was assessed. Most of
capitals revealed significant positive trends of most of the HW hazard
characteristics and substantial HWHI increases were observed during the
sub-period 1998-2015, especially in Central-Eastern and Southeastern
cities. On the other hand, little HWHI increases were observed in most
of Northern capitals and even opposite situations were observed in
several Northern and especially Southwestern cities. Results from this
study represent a support for planning urban HW-related mitigation and
adaptation strategies with the priority in Southeastern cities.

**Keywords:** Heat-wave trend; Number of heat-waves; Long heat-waves;
High-intensity heat-waves; Timing; Urban areas; Apparent Temperature;
<span style="background: #ffffff">GSOD. </span>

